In the bandwidth allocation problem, we use
one variable per path in order to encode a
network flow problem as a linear program and
we argued that that’s not an efficient way
to do it. So, let us look at a mode direct
way to represent network flows in terms of
linear programs.
So, suppose we have an oil network which is
shown as given in this directed graph. So,
we have a source vertex s and we have a target
or a sink vertex t and our aim is to ship
as much oil as we can from s to t given the
pipes that we are given. So, of course, one
property of a flow is that it is must flow,
so I cannot keep any quantity at any intermediate
node. So, anything that enters b must leave
b, anything that enters d must leave d.
So, if we try to do this, then for instance
this green quantity represents one possible
flow, I send 2 units from s to a 1 from s
to b 4 from s to c and you can check that
these are infact within the capacity. I could
have sent 3, 3 and 4 and have set 2, 1 and
4 and I keep on going. And therefore, now
at this particular thing I have a total of
7 units which flows out of s and 7 units which
comes into t. So, I am able to flow 7 units
from s to t given this network.
So, we can just verify this locally that this
is a flow by check instance at d, the total
quantity flowing in 2 plus 1, 3 if nothing
is stored because the total quantity flowing
out is again 2 plus 1, 3. So, if we can do
local checks like this, we can satisfy our
self that this is a valid flow, the total
amount is 7. But, the question is, is this
the maximum? How do we know that we achieve
the maximum or not?
So, the problem just to face it formally is
that we have given a special type of graph,
it is a directed graph and it has two special
nodes, a source and a sink. The source has
no incoming edges and the sink has no outgoing
edges. Each edge has a capacity, which is
a weight associated with the edge and our
aims to come up with the flow, the flow is
again the quantity that we will assign each
edge. And now the flow must satisfy some basic
conditions, the flow must always be less than
the capacity, then we have no storage.
So, at every internal node the total amount
flowing into the node must be equal to the
total amount flowing out. So, this is called
conservation of flow. We cannot lose anything
or generate anything at an intermediate node,
anything that comes in must go out. And finally,
what we want to do is we want to optimize
the total volume of flow, the total volume
of flow is the amount of flow which is coming
out of here which is also of course, the amount
of flow which is going there because no flow
can be lost. So, we can look at either end,
but lets just define it, to be the total volume
of the outgoing flow from the source.
So, now we have this formulation in mind,
so we can now set up a linear program for
it, what we associate it do is that we associate
as we said one, variable for each edge. So,
for instance for the edge s a we have f s
a and then for the edge b d for example, we
have f b d and then for c e, we have f c e
and so on. So, we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, I believe, edges the 11 edges
and therefore, we have 11 variables in this
linear program.
Now, what can we do in this variables, one
first is we can say that each variable is
constrained by the capacity of the corresponding
edge. So, f b a, so b a is now this edge,
it has a capacity of 10. So, whatever flow
I finally arrive at from b to a must be less
than 10 and the other thing that we can say
is that we must have a conservation of flow
at each internal node. So, for instance if
I look at this node d, then the incoming flow
is a d plus b d, the outgoing flow is d c
plus d e plus d t and these two quantities
must be equal, f a d plus f b d must be equal
to f d c plus f d e plus f d t.
And finally, so these are the constraints,
so the constraint says that every edge can
only carry or flow with in this capacity and
in every internal node there is a conservation
of flow. And finally, our objective is to
maximize what happens on these three edges
f s a plus f s b plus f s c, this is our objective
function.
So, of course as before we will just invoke
a linear programming solver such as simplex
on this and get an answer. But, what we will
do now is to understand what this actually
means, remember how simplex works. So, simplex
start with the vertex of feasible region gives
going from one vertex to the next. So, as
long as it’s increasing the flow is actually
taking an existing flow and adding something
do it and this can actually be interpreted
directly in terms of the flow finding algorithm.
So, this is an algorithm called the Ford-Fulkerson
algorithm which actually tries to directly
solve a network flow problem by gradually
building up an optimum flow. So, the algorithm
assume you starts with 0 flow and then you
choose some path on which there is pair capacity
and then on this path, you augment the flow
as much as possible, so that path become saturated.
So, now if you look at the algorithm network
on the right, it is very clear that there
is a flow possible of two, you can send one
unit of flow that way, you can sent one unit
of flow this way. But, Ford-Fulkerson algorithm
says take any path which exists and starts
flowing things to there.
So, you could for instances begin with this
path, the one that goes from s to d then from
the d down to e and then to t. So, flows one
unit, but now this point this edge is not
saturated and this edge is not saturated and
of course, this edge is in the wrong direction.
So, I cannot make use of these two capacities
to generate the second unit of flow, so it
looks like the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm reaches
a bottle neck, if you choose the wrong path
to start with.
So, the solution is to save that even if you
have taken a bad path, one of the things we
can do is reverse the decision we made earlier.
So, we want to say that if we are flowing
one through this, then we can reduce this
flow. So, we can divert this flow back another
way, so that is a bit complicated to describe,
but one way to solve it is to actually setup
and extra edge allowing us flow things back.
So, this is what we call the residual graph,
so in the residual graph what we will do is
we will actually take the flow that we just
constructed and then we will change the capacities.
So, the forward edge s to d which had capacity
1 and flow 1, now has residual capacity 0.
So, we have a regular edge then we replaced
it is weight by the actual amount that is
still available. So, that is the capacity
minus the current flow and in addition we
add these new edges - these backward edges,
which correspond to these flows that we have
committed, but which we may want to change
later.
So, we have sent a flow 1 from s to d, but
now we can reduce that flow by sending some
flow back from d to s that is what this is
supposed to do. So, formally this is how we
construct the residual graph, you take the
original graph then any flow that you have
set up in an existing edge, you reduce the
capacity of that edge by that flow, and corresponding
to that flow you setup a reverse edge which
allows us later to undo this.
So, going back to this example, so what we
would do is we would first start with this
wrong flow and then we will say, but then
we build this residual graph and now we will
observe that in this residual graph, there
is a path which goes like this. So, we are
not talking about the original graph, we are
only talking about residual graph at each
stage. So, we will now build this. Now this
will result in the new flows. So, this will
end up reducing a 0 here a new edge back here,
similarly a 0 here, a new edge back here and
this one will now become canceled out.
Because now this path has this flow restored
to one and this edge will disappear and now
in this new graph we will find that there
are no edges left, because I have 0 capacity
going from s to d and 0 capacity going to
s to e. So, I cannot leave any flow from s,
so this is my final flow, so this is the ford
Fulkerson algorithm, let us look at it again
in a slightly similar structure, but with
us slightly different set of numbers.
So, this is a graph which has no 1s, but some
20s and 30s, so here intuitively with the
claim is that all the 30 units can flow. But,
the 30 units cannot flow unlike the earlier
case along the edges of the diagonal, because
if I take 20 units up then I must split it
as 10 plus 10. So, I must recognize that 10
must go down and 10 must go there, similarly
if I put 10 here then this 10 and then incoming
10 combine from these 20, so this is have
I get of flow of 30 in this graph.
But, if I start the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm,
it will try to saturated the path. So, supposing
it identifies the path s to d to e to t, then
if it identifies this path then it is put
at 20 flow through this edge.
So, we start with it in this flow and we build
the residual graph, the residual graph says
that this 10 is 30 minus 20. The residual
capacity from d to e is now 10 because I had
a capacity of 30 and I put 23. And the blue
edge is now, the residual edge which allows
me to reduce this 20 back, similarly from
s to d I had earlier a capacity of 20. I have
put 20 through it. So, its reduced capacity
is now 0. But, I have a backward edge which
allows we to undo this later requirement and
the same width e to t, e to t is reduced to
0, but I have a backward edge. Now, I look
for another path in this graph, so for instances
I find that this path is there I have a path
from s to e to d to t.
And in s to e to d to t my constraint is 10,
because I have only ten flowing out of s to
begin with, so I take that 10 and then I build
a residual graph.
So, when I take that 10 these quantities here
which are associated with this edge gets restored
back by 10. Because the total flow from d
to e was 20 in the first round minus 10 in
the second round so it’s 10 therefore, the
residues 30 minus 10, it will 20 and everywhere
else now I’ve got 0 because I’ve saturated,
now if I look at s there is no outgoing flow
possible in this residual graph.
So, then I say that there are no more feasible
path and I stop and the residual edges, or
if I have been keeping track of that flow,
it will tell me that I have achieved a flow
of 30 in this graph.
So, again if you want to ask the question
as to why a given flow is optimal, we can
ask for some quantity which is a certificate
of optimality. So, if we go back to that original
oil shipping thing we claim that we could
setup a flow of 7. So, by hand we constructed
a flow of 7, now let us look at these three
edges, the edge a to d, the edge b to d, the
edge s to c, if we disconnect this graph by
cutting these edges, or if we cut these edges
we disconnect this graph.
So, these three edges form what is called
a cut between s and t, now in this cut the
total capacity is 4 plus 1 plus 2, 7. Now
if there is any flow at all; however, it flows
it must cross from this side to this side
from the left to the right. So, it can only
flow from the left to the right through the
edges with a part of that cut that the cut
can only support a flow of 7. So, therefore
our optimum flow can definitely not exceed
7 in this example, which we have already achieved.
So, we know that we can do flow of 7, but
no more than 7 is possible, because this cut
will prevent anything more than 7 from flowing
from the left to the right. So, actually in
this case this shows us that 7 is optimum,
so in general you can look at various such
cuts. So, cut is any set of edges with disconnects
s from t and you can calculate the minimum
cut across all of these and it is pretty clear
that the maximum flow cannot exceed the minimum
cut, because it has to cross this cut. So,
you have to go from one side to another it
can only take that much of capacities, so
the flow cannot exceed that.
So, what is surprising is that actually that
it will always in this example of the we did
it was equal, but it always going to be equal.
So, the max flow min cut theorem says, that
the max flow is actually always equal to the
minimum cut. So, here is one way to understand
this, so if we look at our l p solution, when
we achieve the maximum flow, then s is going
to be disconnected from t, there is no further
path if I look at edge weight 0 and I remove
those edges, then there is no further path.
So, s is disconnected from t, so there is
a cut there are some edges which disconnect
edge s from t. Now, let us look at any edge
in the residual graph at that point which
goes from the left hand side to the right
hand side. So, left is everything, so everywhere
inside this I do have paths with nonzero edges
and everywhere inside this I do have paths
with nonzero weights. So, now but I cannot
get from the blue side to the green side.
So; that means, that in the forward direction
all the edges must have saturated their capacity.
So, every edge from l to r is actually at
full capacity, what about an edge in my residual
graph f to r to l, the claim is a there was
some capacity here then they would be a reverse
edge which goes this way, which would be at
non zero capacity. So, there would be a path
from s to t but there are no paths, so this
must be at 0.
So, all the reverse edges must be at 0 all
the forward edges must be a full capacity.
So, this gives a not very precise, but a reason
why, the max flow will actually saturate this
cut, but this could be any cut. So, therefore
the minimum cut in particular will be saturated
and therefore, the max flow cannot exceed
the minimum cut anyway, so the maximum must
achieve the minimum cut value.
So, one think that one has to be careful about
in the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is the choice
of how to increase the path. So, remember
that in our pathological examples, we instead
of going around the diamond you go through
the center. So, supposing we keep doing that
the model happen is here after one iteration,
we go through this center and then we reduce
this 99 this to 0 this to 99 and we will set
up a reverse edge of size 1.
Then this next iteration we will go in the
reverse direction and we will again reduce
this to 99 this to 99 and then we’ll set
up this reset this way back to one. So, this
way we can keep zig-zagging. So, I will go
from 99 to 98 and the down algorithm 99 to
98, so it will take me 200 iterations in order
to find this path, that this flow has 200.
on the other hand it’s pretty clear that
I could done it two iteration if had been
cleverer.
Because I could have just said, initially
there is a path of 200 there and that saturates
those two edges and there is another path
of 200 there, in a path of 100 there in the
path of 100 here. So, in two iterations I
can achieve 200, So it depends quite crucially
on how I pick the path to augment, how do
I take the feasible path which still exist
in the residual graph and choose which one
to add to.
So, in general we cannot say anything good
and Ford-Fulkerson is going to take time which
is proportional to the capacity of the edges
which is not a great idea. Because although
the edges may be large you might may be able
to directly say this edge can take 100 the
next edge can take 100. So, in one shot I
can say the whole path can take 100, but if
I have to do one at a time then it becomes
an extra parameter and not the actual size
of the graph. But, how do we do this feasible
path business at all. So, every time we set
up a residual graph we have to find a path
from s to t and then augment it.
So, this we would have seen right in the beginning
of this course, we will either do it through
breadth first search or depth first search,
finding a path from one node to another node
is typically just the exportation of the graph,
if we use breadth first search, then what
we know we find the shortest path in terms
of number of edges. So, one can prove that
in this the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm, if we
use breadth first search at every iteration
to decide which path to augment, then you
will be augmenting always the shortest path
in terms of edges.
So, for instance in this example here, if
you had a choice between augmenting that path
the 100 path which goes above like this and
the path which goes like this, then breadth
first search will say that the first the red
path has got two edges and the orange path
has got three edges. So, the red path is shorter,
so we must augment that first, so if we use
breadth first search in the ford Fulkerson
algorithm, it turns out that you will always
get something which is proportional to the
product on the vertex in the edges. So, it
will be polynomial in the size of network
independent of the capacities.